Add foreign JS integration article (#14)
haskell/blog.haskell.org: content/case-study-foreign-integration-js-browser/index.md

  syncCallback' incRef >>= install_handler
```

In the above snippet we're creating an `IORef` and pass a callback incrementing it to a foreign function that installs a button in body, counting a number of clicks
(note for brevity I used a multiline syntax that is not yet available for foreign calls). The callback closes over the `IORef` and correctly updates the number after each click.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ceb86903-d136-4821-8e2d-de2e433889a5

Callbacks fully enable probably the most fascinating purpose of JavaScript backend, which is web programming. GHCJS has been around for quite some time now,
however it is both outdated (being a GHC fork requiring separate maintenance; currently stuck on 8.10) and cumbersome to use (often necessitating a separate setup, typically through Nix). In one of my previous companies, while evaluating potential options for rewriting the frontend, I decided to use PureScript. It was close enough to Haskell and very easy to set up - it can be installed directly through `npm`, has its own `stack`-like package manager `spago` with a suite of existing bundler plugins, and a blazing fast language server. 

> During this journey I was using [purescript-halogen](https://github.com/purescript-halogen/purescript-halogen) library - a typesafe, declarative VDOM framework based on the Elm Architecture.

Reviewer: Maybe a link to the Elm Architecture could be useful for the reader?

Author: Added a link to https://guide.elm-lang.org/architecture/

However, with all the joy that the Haskell-like web programming brought me, I couldn't shake the feeling that there is a room for improvement. From the small things that are
always annoying in polyglot stacks (like FE-BE JSON encoding discrepancies or lack of code sharing), to sometimes very illegible `purs` compiler error messages and of course lack of a lot of language features. This is not my intention to criticize - for a language this small I was amazed by the number and quality of existing tools and frameworks and a plenty of documentation; the overall experience exceeded my expectations by far. I would still recommend PureScript to anyone that wants a lightweight, easy to setup web language with strong type system.

However the mentioned shortcomings were why I was closely following the development of the GHC JS backend, wishing to port the `purescript-halogen` library to GHC as soon as it's possible. A fruit of this labour was recently released as [haskell-halogen](https://github.com/Swordlash/haskell-halogen).

## Using JavaScript backend with existing JavaScript tools

> Any, even the most complex and technically beautiful undertaking is worthless if its fruits are not usable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yet, even the most complex and technically beautiful undertaking is worthless if its fruits are not usable. 
```

Author: Done

One of the measures of such usability in this case is interoperability with the JavaScript ecosystem - existing libraries, bundlers, minifiers, as well of the performance (size and speed) of the generated code. 

### Optimizing and bundling

> Currently, `google-closure-compiler` is supported for minification of the bundle (see [previous blog](https://blog.haskell.org/report-of-js-code-minification/)). Let's try it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, `google-closure-compiler` is supported for minification of the bundle (see the blog post on [JS code minification](https://blog.haskell.org/report-of-js-code-minification/)). Let's try it.
```

Author: Done

```sh
mateusz@m12844:~/personal/halogen-blog$ ./run_example 1
(...)

> + npx google-closure-compiler --language_in UNSTABLE --compilation_level ADVANCED_OPTIMIZATIONS --warning_level QUIET --isolation_mode IIFE --assume_function_wrapper --emit_use_strict --js /home/mateusz/personal/halogen-blog/dist-newstyle/build/javascript-ghcjs/ghc-9.12.1/example1-0.1.0.0/x/example1/build/example1/example1.jsexe/all.js --js /home/mateusz/personal/halogen-blog/dist-newstyle/build/javascript-ghcjs/ghc-9.12.1/example1-0.1.0.0/x/example1/build/example1/example1.jsexe/all.externs.js --js_output_file ../dev/index.js

Reviewer 2: May be add a small description why `UNSTABLE` with a link?

Author: Sure. Added.

Input size: 1.8M
Output size: 396K
```

Notice we have to call `google-closure-compiler` with two input files: first is the `all.js` package generated by the compiler after bundling our library with all dependencies,

> GHC rts and emscripten rts files; second, is the `all.externs.js` file that declares external variables for the minifier. Its purpose is twofold - first it instructs the compiler those are declared elsewhere and it should not fail with undeclared variable; second, it prohibits mangling those identifiers during minification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GHC's RTS and emscripten RTS files; second, is the `all.externs.js` file that declares external variables for the minifier. Its purpose is twofold - It informs the compiler that those variables are declared elsewhere, as not to fail with an "undeclared variable" error, and it prevents the mangling of those identifiers during minification.
```

Author: Done

Nice! We reduced size of the js file from 1.8M to merely 396K. This is even smaller after compression:
```sh
mateusz@m12844:~/personal/halogen-blog$ brotli -Z -o dev/index.js.br dev/index.js
mateusz@m12844:~/personal/halogen-blog$ du -h dev/index.js.br

> 76K     dev/index.js.br

Reviewer 2: wow wow

```html
<div class="mdc-touch-target-wrapper">
  <button class="mdc-button mdc-button--outlined mdc-button--icon-leading"> <!-- this is {element} in below code -->
    <span class="mdc-button__ripple"></span>
    <span class="mdc-button__touch"></span>
    <i class="material-icons mdc-button__icon" aria-hidden="true">bookmark</i>
    <span class="mdc-button__label">My Accessible Button</span>
  </button>
</div>
```
- "Activate" the material library on it:
```javascript
import {MDCRipple} from '@material/ripple';

const buttonRipple = new MDCRipple(element);
```
- Import material styles and icons into your `.scss` bundle
- Destroy the element once it's removed from DOM: `buttonRipple.destroy()`.

With this, we can start implementation!
file: example2/src/Button.hs 

First, a few imports:
```haskell
import Halogen hiding (Initialize, Finalize, State)
import Halogen.HTML qualified as HH
import Halogen.HTML.Properties qualified as HP
import Halogen.HTML.Properties.ARIA qualified as HPA
import Halogen.HTML.Events qualified as HE
import Web.DOM.Internal.Types (HTMLElement)
import Control.Monad.State
import Data.Foreign
import Data.Foldable
import Data.Text qualified as T
```

> We are going to use foreign import for initializing and destroying a button ripple effect. We will include this code in `js-sources` pragma of the cabalfile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are going to use foreign import for initializing and destroying a button ripple effect. We will include this code in `js-sources` field of the package's cabal file:
```

Author: Done

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```cabal
```

Author: Done

them to too much implementation detail. Can we do better?

The answer is - yes, if we ditch the closure compiler but use `swc` instead. [swc](https://swc.rs/) is a Rust-based platform used by a lot of tools like `Parser`, `Next.js` 
or `Vercel`, and provides its own minifier pipeline with webpack plugin.

What we have to do is, instead of installing our workaround and calling `google-closure-compiler`, add the following loader to our webpack file:
```javascript
// mateusz@m12844:~/personal/halogen-blog$ cat example2/assets/webpack.config.js

module.exports = {
  // no more Button here, `index.js` is just a copy of `all.js`
  entry: ['./example2/assets/index.js', './example2/assets/style.scss'],
  // (...)
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.s[ac]ss$/i,
        use: [ "style-loader", "css-loader", "sass-loader"],
      },
      {
        test: /\.m?js$/,
        exclude: /(node_modules)/,
        use: {
          loader: "swc-loader"
        }
      }
    ],
  },
  // (...)
};

// mateusz@m12844:~/personal/halogen-blog$ cat .swcrc
{
  "minify": true,
  "jsc": {
    "minify": {
      "compress": true,
      "mangle": true,
      "sourceMap": false
    }
  }
}
```

> And voila! It all works as before. The uncompressed bundle size is slightly bigger (844 KiB vs 803 KiB with `google-closure-compiler`) however we don't need any more workarounds,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And voilà! It all works as before. The uncompressed bundle size is slightly bigger (844 KiB vs 803 KiB with `google-closure-compiler`) however we don't need any more workarounds,
```

Author: Fixed (sorry I never know whether it's acute or grave)

Reviewer 3: nie ma problem. :)

Author: *problemu (it's genitive) ;)

and we can safely ship our foreign code with imports to our users (provided they do install our `npm` dependencies).

A library with richer functionality is available [here](https://github.com/Swordlash/haskell-halogen-material).
At the moment of writing, it contains Halogen components for customizable buttons, lists and tabbed panes.

## Conclusion

The above article shows how to use the JavaScript backend effectively and integrate it with foreign libraries, using `webpack` for bundling and `swc-loader` for minification/mangling.

What's next? There is still a lot to do in terms of code size & performance, as well as integration with other tools:

> - This cabal [PR](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/10722) adds a new pragma `js-options` that allows to pass custom flags to `js-sources` preprocessor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This cabal [PR](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/10722) adds a new field, `js-options`, that allows to pass custom flags to `js-sources` preprocessor.
```

Author: Fixed

  Notably that would enable i.e. conditional compilation of traces along the lines of `#ifdef XXX <put-trace>` in foreign library code and `if flag(trace-flag) js-options: -optJSP-DXXX` in cabal file.
- Low-hanging fruits like [adding multiline strings support to inline foreign imports](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/25633).
- Bigger [integration efforts](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/25469) with npm.

What is still a small unknown is deeper integration of the GHC build pipeline with `webpack` build pipeline, in the spirit of gathering `npm` libraries that need to be installed for each Haskell dependency, like `@material/button` in the above example. 
I believe there will have to be a way of declaring inside the cabal package an `npm` dependency (something like the existing `pkgconfig-depends`) and
a webpack plugin will be created for loading haskell package for bundling.

Personally, I'm going to continue maintaining and developing the `haskell-halogen` and `haskell-halogen-material` libraries, adding more component classes to the latter.

## Thanks!

> Many thanks to [Serge S. Gulin](https://github.com/GulinSS) for his help and discussions on Matrix channel, and to [Hécate Kleidukos](https://gitlab.haskell.org/Kleidukos) for inviting me to write this blog. I want also to thank [Sylvain Henry](https://gitlab.haskell.org/hsyl20) and [Luite Stegeman](https://gitlab.haskell.org/luite) for our mail and PR discussions, and whole IOG GHC Engineering team for the joint effort of releasing the JS backend. Awesome work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many thanks to [Serge S. Gulin](https://github.com/GulinSS) for his help and discussions on Matrix channel, and to [Hécate Kleidukos](https://gitlab.haskell.org/Kleidukos) for inviting me to write this blog post. I want also to thank [Sylvain Henry](https://gitlab.haskell.org/hsyl20) and [Luite Stegeman](https://gitlab.haskell.org/luite) for our mail and PR discussions, and whole IOG GHC Engineering team for the joint effort of releasing the JS backend. Awesome work!
```

Author: Done
